README.md, before:

# Ironclad Agent Ledger

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/logo.png" alt="Ironclad Logo" width="120" />
</p>

**A cryptographically verified, state-driven agent framework for Automated Security Auditing.**

Ironclad gives you an immutable ledger and a verify-then-commit loop so every agent action is hashed, validated, and recorded. No chat buffer, no prompt injection: the agent’s state lives in PostgreSQL, and a pure Rust Tripwire validates every intent before it is committed or executed.

---

## The Philosophy

**The Agent is the Database.** The Rust process is a transient worker. All durable state—the event log and snapshots—lives in PostgreSQL. The binary has no long-term memory; it restores state from the ledger on each run.

**Verify Then Commit.** Proposed actions from the LLM are never trusted directly. A **Tripwire** layer (pure Rust) validates every intent against:

- **Paths:** Only under allowed directories (e.g. workspace).
- **Networks:** Only allowlisted domains, HTTPS by default.
- **Commands:** A blocklist (e.g. `sudo`, `rm -rf`) blocks dangerous shell commands.

Only intents that pass Tripwire are appended to the PostgreSQL ledger and executed. This design prevents prompt injection and amnesia by using an append-only, hash-chained event log instead of a traditional LLM chat buffer: each event is linked to the previous one by a SHA-256 hash, and nothing is ever updated or deleted.

---

## Architecture

The cognitive loop is a strict pipeline: **Perceive → Propose → Verify → Commit → Execute.**

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  Perceive[Perceive State]
  Propose[Propose Intent]
  Verify[Verify Intent]
  Commit[Commit to Ledger]
  Execute[Execute Side Effect]
  Ollama[Ollama]
  Tripwire[Tripwire]
  DB[(PostgreSQL)]
  Host[Host]
  Perceive -->|restore from DB| Propose
  Propose -->|LLM JSON| Ollama
  Ollama --> Propose
  Propose --> Verify
  Verify --> Tripwire
  Tripwire -->|allowed only| Commit
  Commit -->|append_event| DB
  Commit --> Execute
  Execute -->|run/read/http| Host
  Execute -->|observation| DB
```

1. **Perceive:** Restore agent state from the ledger (latest snapshot + replayed events).
2. **Propose:** Send state to Ollama; receive a single JSON intent (e.g. `run_command`, `read_file`, `http_get`, `complete`).
3. **Verify:** Tripwire validates paths, domains, and commands; reject or accept.
4. **Commit:** Append the action to the ledger (hash-chained), then run the side effect.
5. **Execute:** Run the command, read the file, or perform the HTTP GET; append the observation to the ledger. Loop until the agent returns `complete` or `max_steps` is reached.

---

## Zero Friction Setup

Ironclad is **self-deploying**. You do not need to:

- Manually create a PostgreSQL database or run migrations.
- Configure a `.env` file (optional; defaults work out of the box).
- Run `sqlx migrate` or any CLI migration tool.

**What happens when you run the binary:**

- If `DATABASE_URL` is unset, the app defaults to `postgres://ironclad:ironclad@localhost:5432/ironclad`.
- It checks for a Docker container named `ironclad-postgres`. If missing or stopped, it starts one with the correct user, password, and database.
- It polls until PostgreSQL accepts connections, then runs migrations and creates the genesis block.
- For **audit**, it ensures Ollama is reachable and pulls the configured model (e.g. `mistral`) in the background if needed.

You can still set `DATABASE_URL` (and optionally `.env`) to use your own Postgres and skip Docker.

---

## Usage

### Serve: dashboard only

Run the database, migrations, and the **Observer Dashboard** on port 3000. The agent is not started; the dashboard shows the current ledger (and will show new events if you run an audit in another process).

```bash
cargo run -- serve
```

Then open **http://localhost:3000** to view the real-time Observer.

### Audit: run an audit with a prompt

Run a full audit with a required prompt. The Observer starts in the background; the cognitive loop runs with your instruction (e.g. “Read server_config.txt”) so the agent has a clear goal.

```bash
cargo run -- audit "Read server_config.txt"
```

View the **Real Time Observer Dashboard** at **http://localhost:3000** while the audit runs. New ledger events (thoughts, actions, observations) stream in via Server-Sent Events.

Optional environment variables (see `.env.example`):

- `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` (default: `http://localhost:11434`)
- `OLLAMA_MODEL` (default: `mistral`)
- `AGENT_ALLOWED_DOMAINS` (comma-separated; for Tripwire `http_get`)
- `AGENT_MAX_STEPS` (max loop iterations; no limit if unset)

---

## Prerequisites

- **Rust** (e.g. 1.70+; `rustup` recommended)
- **Docker** (for default Postgres when `DATABASE_URL` is not set)
- **Ollama** (for `audit`; must be running and will pull the model if missing)

---

## Project layout

- `assets/logo.png` — Project logo (README and Windows binary icon)
- `src/main.rs` — CLI entry (serve / audit)
- `src/server.rs` — Axum server: GET `/` (embedded HTML), GET `/api/stream` (SSE)
- `src/agent.rs` — Cognitive loop (perceive → propose → verify → commit → execute)
- `src/ledger.rs` — Append-only event log (hash chain, genesis)
- `src/tripwire.rs` — Intent validation (paths, domains, commands)
- `src/llm.rs` — Ollama chat client (state → JSON intent)
- `src/executor.rs` — Run command / read file / HTTP GET
- `migrations/` — SQL for `agent_events` and `agent_snapshots`

---

## License

MIT OR Apache-2.0

Commit message:

Enhance Ironclad Agent Ledger with session management and security features. Added session creation, listing, and completion functionality in the ledger module. Implemented a dual-LLM guard for intent validation and improved command execution safety with allowed program checks. Updated README to reflect new features and modified HTML for session goal display. Enhanced agent cognitive loop with justification and reasoning for proposed intents.

README.md, after:

# Ironclad Agent Ledger

<p align="center">
  <img src="assets/logo.png" alt="Ironclad Logo" width="120" />
</p>

**A cryptographically verified, state-driven agent framework for Automated Security Auditing.**

Ironclad gives you an immutable ledger and a verify-then-commit loop so every agent action is hashed, validated, and recorded. The agent's state lives in PostgreSQL, and a **3-layer semantic guard** significantly reduces the attack surface for prompt injection and off-goal actions.

---

## The Philosophy

**The Agent is the Database.** The Rust process is a transient worker. All durable state — the event log and snapshots — lives in PostgreSQL. The binary has no long-term memory; it restores state from the ledger on each run.

**Verify Then Commit.** Proposed actions from the LLM are never trusted directly. A **3-Layer Semantic Guard** validates every intent before it is committed or executed:

1. **Ledger Goal Anchoring.** The session goal is embedded in every prompt. The agent's action log is its only source of truth — no mutable chat buffer that attackers can hijack. Each event is SHA-256-chained to the previous one; any tampered record is detected on startup.

2. **Dual-LLM Guard.** A configurable secondary LLM (`GUARD_LLM_BACKEND` / `GUARD_LLM_MODEL`) evaluates each proposed action against the stated goal and returns `ALLOW` or `DENY: <reason>`. The Guard runs in complete environment isolation from the primary reasoning model.

3. **Output Content Scanning.** Execution observations are scanned for injection patterns (exfiltration URLs, embedded prompts, shell escape sequences). Suspicious content is redacted before being appended to the ledger.

In addition, a pure Rust **Tripwire** enforces structural rules:

- **Paths:** Only under allowed directories (e.g. workspace).
- **Networks:** Only allowlisted domains, HTTPS by default.
- **Commands:** A blocklist (e.g. `sudo`, `rm -rf`) blocks dangerous shell commands.
- **Justification:** Every non-complete action must include a justification of at least 5 characters; empty or missing justifications are rejected.

Together these layers raise the bar for prompt injection without claiming unconditional immunity — no software defence is absolute. Intents that pass all checks are appended to the hash-chained PostgreSQL ledger and executed; nothing is ever updated or deleted.

---

## Architecture

The cognitive loop is a strict pipeline: **Perceive -> Propose -> Verify -> Commit -> Execute.**

```mermaid
flowchart LR
  Perceive[Perceive State]
  Propose[Propose Intent]
  Verify[Verify Intent]
  Commit[Commit to Ledger]
  Execute[Execute Side Effect]
  Ollama[Ollama]
  Tripwire[Tripwire + Guard]
  DB[(PostgreSQL)]
  Host[Host]
  Perceive -->|restore from DB| Propose
  Propose -->|LLM JSON| Ollama
  Ollama --> Propose
  Propose --> Verify
  Verify --> Tripwire
  Tripwire -->|allowed only| Commit
  Commit -->|append_event| DB
  Commit --> Execute
  Execute -->|run/read/http| Host
  Execute -->|observation| DB
```

1. **Perceive:** Restore agent state from the ledger (latest snapshot + replayed events).
2. **Propose:** Send state to Ollama; receive a single JSON intent (e.g. `run_command`, `read_file`, `http_get`, `complete`).
3. **Verify:** Tripwire validates paths, domains, commands, and justification; Guard LLM checks goal alignment; reject or accept.
4. **Commit:** Append the action to the ledger (hash-chained), then run the side effect.
5. **Execute:** Run the command, read the file, or perform the HTTP GET; append the observation to the ledger. Loop until the agent returns `complete` or `max_steps` is reached.

---

## Zero Friction Setup

Ironclad is **self-deploying**. You do not need to:

- Manually create a PostgreSQL database or run migrations.
- Configure a `.env` file (optional; defaults work out of the box).
- Run `sqlx migrate` or any CLI migration tool.

**What happens when you run the binary:**

- If `DATABASE_URL` is unset, the app defaults to `postgres://ironclad:ironclad@localhost:5432/ironclad`.
- It checks for a Docker container named `ironclad-postgres`. If missing or stopped, it starts one with the correct user, password, and database.
- It polls until PostgreSQL accepts connections, then runs migrations and creates the genesis block.
- For **audit**, it ensures Ollama is reachable and pulls the configured model (e.g. `mistral`) in the background if needed.

You can still set `DATABASE_URL` (and optionally `.env`) to use your own Postgres and skip Docker.

---

## Usage

### Serve: dashboard only

Run the database, migrations, and the **Observer Dashboard** on port 3000. The agent is not started; the dashboard shows the current ledger (and will show new events if you run an audit in another process).

```bash
cargo run -- serve
```

Then open **http://localhost:3000** to view the real-time Observer.

### Audit: run an audit with a prompt

Run a full audit with a required prompt. The Observer starts in the background; the cognitive loop runs with your instruction (e.g. "Read server_config.txt") so the agent has a clear goal.

```bash
cargo run -- audit "Read server_config.txt"
```

View the **Real Time Observer Dashboard** at **http://localhost:3000** while the audit runs. New ledger events (thoughts, actions, observations) stream in via Server-Sent Events.

View the **Prometheus metrics** at **http://localhost:3000/metrics**.

Optional environment variables (see `.env.example`):

- `OLLAMA_BASE_URL` (default: `http://localhost:11434`)
- `OLLAMA_MODEL` (default: `mistral`)
- `LLM_BACKEND` (`ollama`, `openai`, or `anthropic`; default: `ollama`)
- `GUARD_LLM_BACKEND` (backend for the Guard LLM; defaults to `LLM_BACKEND`)
- `GUARD_LLM_MODEL` (model for the Guard LLM; defaults to primary model)
- `AGENT_ALLOWED_DOMAINS` (comma-separated; for Tripwire `http_get`)
- `AGENT_MAX_STEPS` (max loop iterations; no limit if unset)

---

## Prerequisites

- **Rust** (e.g. 1.70+; `rustup` recommended)
- **Docker** (for default Postgres when `DATABASE_URL` is not set)
- **Ollama** (for `audit`; must be running and will pull the model if missing)

---

## Project layout

- `assets/logo.png` — Project logo (README and Windows binary icon)
- `src/main.rs` — CLI entry (serve / audit)
- `src/server.rs` — Axum server: GET `/` (embedded HTML), GET `/api/stream` (SSE)
- `src/agent.rs` — Cognitive loop (perceive -> propose -> verify -> commit -> execute)
- `src/ledger.rs` — Append-only event log (hash chain, genesis)
- `src/tripwire.rs` — Intent validation (paths, domains, commands, justification)
- `src/guard.rs` — Dual-LLM Guard (secondary LLM goal alignment check)
- `src/sandbox.rs` — Linux Landlock sandbox for child processes
- `src/llm/` — LLM backends (Ollama, OpenAI, Anthropic)
- `src/executor.rs` — Run command / read file / HTTP GET
- `migrations/` — SQL for `agent_events`, `agent_snapshots`, and related tables

---

## License

MIT OR Apache-2.0
